---
date: 2021-12-25
draft: true
image: webup-1-code-transparent
tags:
  - amazon web services
  - cloudformation
  - python
  - s3
title: WebUp 1.0.0
advertising:
  image: webup-1-code
---

I've been working on the [antagonist.app](https://antagonist.app/) landing page this week. Perhaps unsurprisingly, it's a static HTML site uploaded to an S3 bucket behind a CloudFront distribution. Who'd have guessed?

No problemo, except for the HTTP headers. The `Content-Type` headers were all over the place, and of course there weren't any `Cache-Control` headers.

What I wanted was a neat little Python package that could upload a directory to an S3 bucket, via concurrent parallel threads, and set those `Content-Type` and `Cache-Control` headers for me.

What I built was `WebUp`.

<!--more-->

## Usage

The most basic demonstration of WebUp is simply to upload a directory to a bucket with all the default configuration in play:

```python
from webup import upload

upload("./public", "my-bucket")
```

WebUp will automatically set the `Content-Type` header for a bunch of files, but I can add my own types before the upload. For example, to have `*.foo` files report as `application/foo`:

```python
from webup import set_content_type, upload

set_content_type(".foo", "application/foo")
upload("./public", "my-bucket")
```

By default, every file will return `max-age=60` for their `Cache-Control` header, but I can change that default and add file-specific ages:

```python
from webup import (
    set_default_maximum_age,
    set_maximum_age,
    upload,
)

# Serve *.css files with Cache-Control "max-age=600":
set_maximum_age(".css", 600)

# Serve all other files with Cache-Control "max-age=300":
set_default_maximum_age(300)

upload("./public", "my-bucket")
```

Finally, I can perform read-only uploads to verify my setup. The dry-run will be silent by default, but I can pass in a string writer to see the details:

```python
from sys import stdout
from webup import upload

upload("./public", "my-bucket", out=stdout, read_only=True)
```

## WebUp 1.0

As always, WebUp can be installed via pip:

```shell
pip install webup
```

The code is released under the MIT licence at [github.com/cariad/webup](https://github.com/cariad/webup), and the package is fully documented at [cariad.github.io/webup](https://cariad.github.io/webup/webup.html).

Have fun!
