---
date: 2024-04-11
image: lambdaq-state-machine-sqs
summary: I got bored of writing the boilerplate. My team got bored of reviewing it. No more!
tags:
  - amazon web services
  - lambda
  - python
title: Writing AWS Lambda functions behind SQS with LambdaQ
---

I write a lot of Amazon Web Services Lambda functions, and the vast majority
are invoked asynchronously by messages on SQS queues published by Step
Functions state machines, rather than directly and synchronously.

It just makes more sense to me to have functions pop messages as-and-when
they're ready, rather than having the state machine try, fail, back-off and
repeat, right?

The downside, naturally, is the boilerplate in each function for parsing SQS
events and finalising each task's success or failure with calls to the Step
Functions `SendTaskSuccess` and `SendTaskFailure` APIs.

That's not so bad, though. The work I enjoy a _little_ less is migrating Lambda
functions from synchronous to asynchronous invocation.

When a function is invoked directly, the event _is_ the message; it's a
one-shot task that returns its single response. When a function is invoked via
an SQS queue, though, the event is a collection or one-or-more SQS records,
each containing a serialised message that must be responded to via Step
Functions' APIs. And updating a function's entrypoint to support _both_
conditions while state machines migrate from synchronous to asynchronous
invocation is… well, it's a living. But I'm bored of writing the same
boilerplate every week.

And that's why I wrote [LambdaQ](https://github.com/cariad/lambdaq)!

## LambdaQ

LambdaQ ("lambda-queue") is a Python package that helps you write Amazon Web
Services Lambda functions that can be called either directly or by messages on
SQS queues published by Step Functions state machines.

The package takes care of the event handling, message deserialisation and API
calls, while you focus on writing decoupled, testable message-handling code.

Time for an example, right?

## Example

Let's say you want to write a Lambda function that receives two numbers and
returns their sum.

We'll start by defining dictionaries for the message (i.e. the numbers to sum)
and the response (i.e. the sum):

```python
from typing import TypedDict

class _Inputs(TypedDict):
    x: int
    y: int

class Inputs(_Inputs, total=False):
    task_token: str

class Sum(TypedDict):
    result: int
```

In this case, the `task_token` key is optional because it'll be present only
when the function is called asynchronously by a state machine.

With those strongly-typed inputs and outputs in place, we can write a message handler:

```python
from lambdaq import Metadata

def perform_sum(message: Inputs, metadata: Metadata) -> Sum:
    return Sum(result=message["x"] + message["y"])
```

The message handler's signature is important; it must accept a message and a
`lambdaq.Metadata` instance. In this case, our message is an `Inputs` instance
and we return a `Sum` instance.

The message handler doesn't care whether the message came from direct
invocation or via an SQS queue. It doesn't care if the response will be
returned directly or via a Step Functions API call. It doesn't care if its
exceptions will be re-thrown to the caller or handled and returned to the state
machine via its APIs. It's just a decoupled, testable function.

Finally, we give the Lambda function an entrypoint that calls
`lambdaq.handle_event`:

```python
from lambdaq import handle_event

def main(event: Any, context: Any) -> Sum | None:
    return handle_event(
        event,
        perform_sum,
        "task_token",
    )
```

The three arguments for `handle_event` are the invocation event, a reference to
the message-handling function and the task token's key. The function will
return a response when called directly, or `None` when called via a queue.

And that's it!

If we invoke the function directly then we get the sum back immediately:

{{< image name="lambdaq-direct-event" >}}

{{< image name="lambdaq-direct-response" >}}

…and if a state machine invokes the function asynchronously via an SQS queue
then the response is returned when it's good and ready:

{{< image name="lambdaq-state-machine-sqs" >}}

And if your queue is configured to buffer and batch messages to Lambda
functions, LambdaQ handles that too and calls your message handler for each one.

## Installation

LambdaQ v1 requires Python 3.10 or later and can be installed from [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/lambdaq/).

```shell
pip install lambdaq
```

The code is released under the MIT licence at
[github.com/cariad/lambdaq](https://github.com/cariad/lambdaq), too.

Have fun!
